---
author: shomiller
comments: true
date: 2017-06-05 18:00:19+00:00
layout: post
slug: physics-gre-astronomy-diversity
title: Astronomy Programs Rejecting the Physics GRE
tags:
- Graduate School
- Diversity
---

An article was [published in Physics Today](http://physicstoday.scitation.org/do/10.1063/PT.5.9090/full/) recently, discussing a recent trend of prestigious astronomy programs either changing their policies regarding the Physics GRE (PGRE), or rejecting it entirely. The article is worth a read -- even for non-physicists -- as it touches on a lot of problems with standardized testing in general. Like almost every grad student I know, I have strong feelings about the PGRE myself, and the article invoked a lot of reactions I thought might be interesting enough to lay out here.

For those who are unfamiliar, the Physics GRE is a 170 minute, 100 question multiple choice test on physics knowledge required by every graduate program I know of as part of their application. The test covers all the core subjects (classical mechanics, electricity and magnetism, quantum mechanics, and statistical mechanics/thermodynamics) as well as around 10 - 20 questions on "special topics", such as particle physics, condensed matter, or other subfields of physics research, designed to reward those who took extra classes or spent a lot of time in a particular research field. The majority of the questions aren't technically difficult -- most of the material is at the level covered in sophomore or junior level courses. That said, answering all the problems in less than 2 minutes each requires a lot of memorization and test taking strategy -- totally disparate from the focus of any good undergraduate physics program.

My first reaction to the story was surprise -- it had never occurred to me to think of the PGRE from an astronomy student's point of view, and I didn't realize that astronomers were all required to take the test in the first place. The whole situation is very strange, and further confused by the fact that astronomy programs vary wildly from school to school. Here at Stony Brook, for example, there is no separate astronomy department (it's just the "Department of Physics & Astronomy"), though there are separate requirements and expectations for students who are on the astronomy track in graduate school. At other schools (such as my undergraduate institution, Illinois) the physics and astronomy departments are entirely separate, live in separate buildings, and (other than maybe some prerequisites) are no more entwined than the physics and math departments. I don't want to get into a debate about which makes more sense -- both systems certainly have their merits and disadvantages -- but it's certainly true that astronomy has a very different language from physics, and requiring astronomy students to take the PGRE seems really non-sensical in a lot of ways.

All that being said, my second reaction to the article was a mix of confusion and frustration -- partly with the article, but partly with a lot of the arguments I've heard against the PGRE in general over the years. While reading the article, I was consistently confused whether the authors were evaluating the merits of the PGRE in general or only in the context of astronomy programs. Both versions of criticism are certainly related, but astronomy students make up a minority of the PGRE test takers, so a distinction should definitely be made.

Personally, I don't think the PGRE is a very good test. As I mentioned above, the skills necessary for getting a good score on the PGRE (as with almost any standardized test) have very little overlap with the ones necessary for succeeding in graduate school, whether you're a theorist or experimentalist. It should be no surprise then, that [scores on the PGRE have no correlation with any measure of "success"](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1512.03709.pdf). There are also tons of specific issues with standardized tests regarding diversity (which is an even bigger concern in physics) that have been well-documented (see some of the references in an old [APS article here](https://physics.aps.org/articles/v9/87), for example).

That being said, it frustrates me that few of the articles I've read that lament the GRE discuss these issues in a broader context. Graduate school admissions are filled with imperfect measures other than the PGRE. Many argue that recommendation letters should receive more emphasis than grades or test scores, but it strikes me that recommendation letters are potentially even more problematic when it comes to diversity issues, given that a vast majority of professors writing them are older white men with innate stereotypes of their own. As for applicants from smaller schools, their chances might be hurt by the PGRE if they do worse on it, but the test can also be a means of demonstrating that they're no less prepared than applicants from large research universities, since it's hard to directly compare their coursework and their faculty are sometimes less well known.

All this is just to say that, while I'm glad the PGRE is being critically examined as an admissions tool, I hope the conversation considers the entirety of the difficulties of admissions decisions and that the PGRE isn't used as a scapegoat to avoid confronting the deeper problems with physics institutions. The lack of diversity in physics programs is a serious issue that needs to be confronted from all angles, and I hope the discussions around admissions help foster solutions in the years to come.
