_drafts/2017-xx-xx-book-review-anomaly.markdown, before:

---
author: shomiller
comments: true
date: 2017-XX-XX 15:00:19+00:00
layout: post
slug: book-review-anomaly
title: Book Review: Anomaly! by Tommaso Dorigo
tags:
- Books
- Particle Physics
---

While it’s something of a cliche, I have to admit that popular physics books played a tremendous role in my path towards studying physics in graduate school. Books such as Stephen Hawking’s A Brief History of Time, Brian Greene’s The Elegant Universe, and Richard Feynman’s QED were some of the most influential books I read in high school, and motivated me to choose physics and math as majors in college. That being said, ever since I started my formal physics education, I’ve tended to shy away from physics when I get a chance to read – mostly just because I could learn the material “for real” and because, as much as I love learning physics, reading popular physics books isn’t the best break from studying.

I had to make an exception though, for Tommaso Dorigo's book, <i>Anomaly!</i>. For one, Tommaso has hosted a prolific blog for many years, which I'm an avid follower of. The main reason I was so intrigued by his book though, is that unlike most popular physics books written by theoretical physicists, <i>Anomaly!</i> is an experimentalists tale. The book is not an explanation of one of the big ideas in the field, but instead an account of what it's like working in a large particle physics collaboration -- in this case, the CDF experiment and the Tevatron at Fermilab.
s
(Give general reasons why I liked the book, overall impression)

(Review each "section" 1. Introduction, 2. The Top Quark, 3. Anomalies etc.)

in anomalies -- make note of the passage at the beginning of chapter 8, describing an interaction that leads to the "impossible event" in detail. very nice!

Summary -- who I think should read the book (particularly any undergraduate, especially theorists or people who are on the fence about particle physics.)

In summary, I really recommend the book for those interested in the subject. My feeling is that while it does contain enough background in the first two chapters to be self-contained, it’s probably going to be a rough slog for people not familiar with the subject. If you’re interested in pursuing particle physics though, it’s certainly worth it. I especially recommend the book for undergraduate students in physics with any interest (even a tangential one) in particle physics – and this goes for theorists as well. Dorigo gives a really unique window on what doing research in particle physics is like as an experimentalist and a better appreciation for what’s behind the results put out by the big experiments of today (particularly those like ATLAS and CMS at the LHC). If you’re on the fence about doing research in particle physics in graduate school, I think the book is exceptionally well suited for helping make a more informed decision, as it’s a really honest depiction of the day to day life of experimentalists.

Commit message:

Future Collider Post, Pt. 1.
Finished first future colliders megapost and posted with a few minor
changes to the previous draft.
More updates to the Anomaly book review.

_drafts/2017-xx-xx-book-review-anomaly.markdown, after:

---
author: shomiller
comments: true
date: 2017-XX-XX 15:00:19+00:00
layout: post
slug: book-review-anomaly
title: Book Review: Anomaly! by Tommaso Dorigo
tags:
- Books
- Particle Physics
---

While it’s something of a cliche, I have to admit that popular physics books played a tremendous role in my path towards studying physics in graduate school. Books such as Stephen Hawking’s A Brief History of Time, Brian Greene’s The Elegant Universe, and Richard Feynman’s QED were some of the most influential books I read in high school, and motivated me to choose physics and math as majors in college. That being said, ever since I started my formal physics education, I’ve tended to shy away from physics when I get a chance to read – mostly just because I could learn the material “for real” and because, as much as I love learning physics, reading popular physics books isn’t the best break from studying.

I had to make an exception though, for Tommaso Dorigo's book, <i>Anomaly!</i>. For one, Tommaso has hosted a prolific blog for many years, which I'm an avid follower of. The main reason I was so intrigued by his book though, is that unlike most popular physics books written by theoretical physicists, <i>Anomaly!</i> is an experimentalists tale. The book is not an explanation of one of the big ideas in the field, but instead an account of what it's like working in a large particle physics collaboration -- in this case, the CDF experiment and the Tevatron at Fermilab.
s
(Give general reasons why I liked the book, overall impression)

(Review each "section" 1. Introduction, 2. The Top Quark, 3. Anomalies etc.)

The first chapter of the book is a quick introduction to particle physics and the Standard Model. While Dorigo explains the concepts very clearly, I expect the discussion is probably too brief to really introduce the subject to those who aren't familiar with it already, but that of course isn't his goal in one chapter. The second chapter is similarly an introduction to hadron colliders, particularly the Tevatron and the Collider Detector at Fermilab (or CDF). Again, for those who aren't familiar with particle physics, there is a lot of information to absorb here, but I thought the second chapter was particularly nice for readers (such as myself), who are too young to know the recent history of particle physics in detail.

The next five chapters read like a short novel by themselves -- they detail the conception and construction of CDF, focusing on a number of difficulties
Then describe how the detector oriented itself around several goals (primarily the Top quark), and had to fight off an up and coming rival in the complementary experiment DZERO.
Finally, gets to the detection etc.

One of my favorite passages comes in the last part of the book at the beginning of Chapter 8: The Impossible Event. Dorigo describes in detail a complex chain of interactions between a proton and anti-proton and the different components of the detector that eventually leads to an event deemed impossible to explain with the Standard Model at CDF. The passage highlights in one page the immense complexities involved in colliding hadrons and reconstructing the particles in the underlying interaction. This passage kicks off several chapters dedicated to the various unexpected detections at CDF and the resulting friction in the community.

Preons, Superjets, Scalar Quarks, ...

Focus on the importance of these things. What is the underlying themes about physics research that you can take away from the book?


In summary, I really recommend the book for those interested in the subject. My feeling is that while it does contain enough background in the first two chapters to be self-contained, it’s probably going to be a rough slog for people not familiar with the subject. If you’re interested in pursuing particle physics though, it’s certainly worth it. I especially recommend the book for undergraduate students in physics with any interest (even a tangential one) in particle physics – and this goes for theorists as well. Dorigo gives a really unique window on what doing research in particle physics is like as an experimentalist and a better appreciation for what’s behind the results put out by the big experiments of today (particularly those like ATLAS and CMS at the LHC). If you’re on the fence about doing research in particle physics in graduate school, I think the book is exceptionally well suited for helping make a more informed decision, as it’s a really honest depiction of the day to day life of experimentalists.
