---
author: shomiller
comments: true
date: 2017-03-30 10:00:19+00:00
layout: post
slug: beyond-wimps-workshop
title: Workshop: Beyond WIMPs
tags:
- Dark Matter
- Particle Physics
---

The first half of this week, I was at a dark matter physics workshop next door at the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics. The workshop was entitled "Beyond WIMPs: From Theory to Detection" and was organized by a couple of professors and postdocs from the YITP here at Stony Brook along with several of their collaborators from out of town. The goal was to discuss ideas about dark matter outside of the WIMP paradigm (which I discussed some in some [earlier]() [posts]()), which has been the guiding principle for many experiments in the last few decades. Since no convincing evidence of dark matter with weak scale mass and couplings has been found as of yet, a key goal for particle physicists is to elucidate what else dark matter could be, and how we might detect it. This was one of my first workshop experiences, particularly as a phenomenologist, so I thought I'd try and give a quick overview of what happened, and some of my thoughts on it all. Luckily, for those interested, the Simons Center records most of the talks, and you can find many of them linked from the [workshop page](http://scgp.stonybrook.edu/archives/18377).


# Day 1: Rotation Curves and MOND

The first day focused on more of the astrophysical aspects of dark matter -- particularly with regards to large and small scale structure formation and rotation curves. The first talk was given by Stacy McGaugh, titled "A Critical Examination of the Existence of Dark Matter". McGaugh has been an important name in cosmology for a long time, but recently he's become better known as an advocate for modified newtonian dynamics (or MOND) as a replacement for dark matter in explaining the anomalous rotation curves we see in galaxies. Recently, McGaugh has been getting extra attention because of a correlation he found with a sample of observed galaxies that relates their observed radial accelerations to only the baryonic (i.e., not dark) matter in the galaxy (see [arXiv:1609.05917](http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05917)). The correlation is extremely tight, even for galaxies whose mass is dominated by dark matter, and this begs for an explanation as naively one would think the acceleration would be controlled by the dominant component of the galaxy's mass (the dark matter), and not the subdominant baryons. In his talk, McGaugh made an honest effort to look at the breadth of astrophysical and cosmological evidence to evaluate the hypotheses of dark matter vs. MOND. He noted that dark matter does far better at explaining observations at the largest scales, particularly with the CMB, but that it still has shortcomings with galaxy scale observations. Inevitably, his talk veered into a heated discussion about whether or not the small scale issues of dark matter were real issues, and whether MOND did a better job of explaining the aforementioned correlation than more advanced simulations of structure formation with dark matter and baryons or self-interacting dark matter. My takeaway from this discussion was that the correlation was a well established feature of galaxies that dark matter has to explain, but it's far from convincing evidence that the existence of dark matter needs to be questioned.

The next talk was by Frank van den Bosch, who discussed a number of aspects of N-body simulations of dark matter. Rather than review the vast number of results in the field, or his own simulations, he instead decided to focus on some of the problems inherent in N-body simulations, and raised questions and challenges for simulators to answer. One the biggest challenges, he noted, was dealing with the force-softening length used in simulations to deal with the unrealistic sizes of simulated objects. He noted that a poor choice of softening length combined with an insufficient number of particles could lead to effects such as spurious fragmentation. He concluded by arguing why these issues leave us far away from really probing halo substructure with simulations.

Unfortunately, I had to miss the following talk by Alyson Brooks due to teaching obligations, but her talk was on the "Small-Scale Crisis" of cold dark matter. Presumably, she discussed the diversity problem, which segued nicely into Manoj Kaplinghat's talk after lunch. If I have the chance, I'll try to go back and watch the recording and update sometime in the future. Briefly, the diversity problem as I understand it is that when we simulate galaxy formation with cold dark matter, the resulting rotation curves all have roughly the same shape -- this shape may change depending on the properties of dark matter (i.e., adding self-interactions as discussed below, or changing baryonic feedback), but observations show a really wide range of rotation curve shapes, which is hard to account for with a single choice of dark matter model. This problem was elucidated a few years ago in a really nice paper by Kyle Oman et. al, [arxiv:1504.01437](https://arxiv.org/abs/1504.01437v2), and is considered one of the biggest challenges dark matter faces today.

After lunch, the simulation talks continued with Manoj Kaplinghat discussing self-interacting dark matter. This 
